===PAGE 1===
Abstract
We propose a Hawkish-Dovish (HD) indicator that measures the de-
gree of ‘hawkishness’ or ‘dovishness’ of the media’s perception of the
ECB’s tone at each press conference. We compare two methods to cal-
culate the indicator: semantic orientation and Support Vector Machines
text classiﬁcation. We show that the latter method tends to provide more
stable and accurate measurements of perception on a labelled test set.
Furthermore, we demonstrate the potential use of this indicator with sev-
eral applications: we perform a correlation analysis with a set of interest
rates, use Latent Dirichlet Allocation to detect the dominant topics in
the news articles, and estimate a set of Taylor rules. The ﬁndings provide
decisive evidence in favour of using an advanced text mining classiﬁcation
model to measure the medias perception and the Taylor rule application
conﬁrms that communication plays a signiﬁcant role in enhancing the
accuracy when trying to estimate the bank’s reaction function.
JEL codes: C02, C63, E52, E58
Keywords: Monetary policy, communication, data mining, quantitative meth-
ods
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
1
===PAGE 2===
Non-technical summary
In recent years communication became increasingly important in central banks.
In particular, after the ﬁnancial crisis, communication has increasingly qualiﬁed
as a genuine policy tool able to steer interest rates in ﬁnancial markets and drive
expectations on the course of monetary policy. With oﬃcial interest rates ap-
proaching zero and thereby reducing their eﬀectiveness, various forms of forward
guidance (i.e. a verbal commitment on the future course of monetary policy un-
conditional or conditional to some economic event) were added to the standard
monetary policy toolkit existing out of interest rates and reﬁnancing instru-
ments for the banking sector. The growing relevance of communication in the
conduct of monetary policy was mirrored by a rising interest of academicians
and practitioners. In particular, a branch of economic research increasingly
focused on the role of communication in adding valuable information besides
what is already contained in macroeconomic variables, and in revealing policy
makers preferences on the course of monetary policy with a view to enhance
predictability. If the traditional approach consists in analysing how information
events impact ﬁnancial market developments and expectations of future policy
moves, more recently analysis shifted towards analysing the language used by
the central bank in its statements and how such message is perceived by its
stakeholders. This paper contributes to the latter with a numerical indicator,
called HD index (after the initials of hawkish and dovish), derived from me-
dia reports on the ECB press conference. Combining concepts and techniques
developed in the context of computational linguistics and data mining, the in-
dicator extracts relevant information on ECB monetary policy as reported by
external observers and may therefore be interpreted as how media perceive the
central banks monetary policy messages. For practical reasons, the perception
is expressed on a numerical interval between -1 (most dovish) and +1 (most
hawkish). In other words, the indicator indicates whether the perceived tone on
monetary policy communication is predominantly on the tightening side (hawk-
ish perception) or rather on the loosening side (dovish perception). Although
the approach to quantify communication is not new, the approach proposed in
this paper is original in various dimensions. First, the indicator does not mea-
sure directly oﬃcial central bank communication but how such communication
is received and interpreted with the crucial support of data mining techniques.
Second, two diﬀerent techniques are employed to compute the HD index: one
based on the semantic orientation (SO) and the second on text classiﬁcation
using Support Vector Machines (SVM). The former, the most commonly used
by researchers, measures how often the ECB is mentioned in a news article to-
gether with a number of given hawkish and dovish words or expressions, while
the latter, computationally more complex, uses a classiﬁcation model to predict
the tone of an article. Both methods are applied to a data set of around 9,000
articles published between January 1999 and March 2016 in order to assess
which methodology produces better results. Based on various criteria (event
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
2
===PAGE 3===
analysis, correlations with actual interest rates and classiﬁcation method) the
SVM methodology tends to produce better and more reliable results. Third,
in addition to its superiority on the SO, the SVM classiﬁcation model can be
used to analyse the terms most frequently employed by media in relation to a
likely future course of monetary policy. Finally, an expanded Taylor rule frame-
work including the HD index alongside traditional variables measuring inﬂation
expectations and economic slack, is presented. Results suggest that the signif-
icance of the HD index as well as a relatively better ﬁt conﬁrm the positive
role of ECB communication in enhancing the accuracy when trying to estimate
the bank’s reaction function, and thus that, on average, the ECB messages are
correctly understood by its media watchers.
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
3
===PAGE 4===
1 Introduction
“In a market economy, transparency and communication are central to
the eﬀectiveness of our monetary policy.”
– Mario Draghi
During the ﬁnancial crisis, monetary policy interest rates reached levels close
to zero in most major central banks. As a result, communication has increas-
ingly qualiﬁed as a powerful instrument able to inﬂuence ﬁnancial market de-
velopments and drive expectations. Forward guidance, i.e. a form of verbal
commitment to keep interest rates at a certain level for a period of time, possi-
bly conditional to certain economic developments, became a genuine monetary
policy instrument for many major central banks in addition to the standard
toolkit of interest rates and reﬁnancing instruments for the banking sector.
Mirroring the increased role of communication in central banks, economic
research has started to focus on how central bank communication adds informa-
tion to that which is already contained in macroeconomic variables and how it
may reveal policy makers individual preference functions. The overall objective
is to enhance predictability of monetary policy decisions. The traditional ap-
proach focuses mainly on how information events aﬀect both ﬁnancial market
developments and expectations of future policy moves.
Media usually analyse central banks’ communication with a view to ex-
tract information about likely future moves of monetary policy rates (Hayo &
Neuenkirch, 2015). Unlike market indicators, extracting relevant information
on monetary policy from media reports is not straightforward and requires the
translation of words into a numerical representation. Ideally, the resulting quan-
titative indicator should represent the media’s perception of the central banks
message and should be able to indicate whether expectations are more on the
tightening side (hawkish perception) or rather on the loosening side (dovish
perception).
In recent years, a number of studies have developed quantitative tools to
measure (or, at least, to express on a numerical scale) the information con-
tained in oﬃcial central banks’ statements (see e.g. KOF Swiss Economic In-
stitute (2007); Lucca & Trebbi (2009)). In other words, this approach can be
characterized as an attempt to quantify information in communication, which
is qualitative by nature. In this paper, we present the development of an in-
dex that measures the interpretation of the European Central Bank’s oﬃcial
communication, using data mining techniques. Concretely, we want to distin-
guish articles that perceive the ECB’s statement as predominantly hawkish -
and thus pointing towards likely future policy rate increases - from articles that
perceive the statement to be rather dovish, hinting at declines or no increases
in policy rates. We use two diﬀerent techniques to measure the tone expressed
in an article published after the press conference: semantic orientation and text
classiﬁcation using Support Vector Machines. The former measures how often
the ECB is mentioned in a news article together with respectively hawkish and
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
4
===PAGE 5===
dovish words, the latter uses a classiﬁcation model to predict the tone of a news
article. We apply both methods to a data set of approximately 8,500 articles
from the Dow Jones Factiva database, published between January 1999 and
March 2016, in order to create the HD-indicator (after the initials of hawkish
and dovish). This indicator represents the average hawkishness or dovishness
of the ECB as perceived by the media after each press conference.
The contribution of this paper is four-fold. First and most obviously, we
present a methodology to compute the quantitative indicator with the character-
istics described above. Secondly, we demonstrate how data mining techniques,
and more speciﬁcally text mining techniques, can bring value in the process of
decision making for central bankers (in particular, on how communication is
perceived). Thirdly, by constructing a speciﬁc Support Vector Machines (SVM)
classiﬁcation model, we can analyse which terms are most frequently used by
the written media to refer to a likely future contraction or expansion of mone-
tary policy. Finally, we show a number of potential uses of the HD indicator:
assessing its relation to interest rates, the use of topic models for a qualitative
assessment of text-based indicators, and a Taylor rule application.
2 Subjective versus automated indicators for cen-
tral bank’s communication
A broad distinction can be made between subjective measures and (semi-)automated
measures developed in the economic literature. A subjective indicator is based
on the subjective evaluation of oﬃcial statements or documents by one or more
expert analysts on given points in time. Especially when expert groups are in-
volved, such evaluation is often expressed on a ﬁxed scale expressing the inten-
sity of dovishness/hawkishness as a suitable combination of the perceived tone
by every single analyst. In general, the evaluation is not based on predeﬁned
procedures and therefore typically suﬀers from a low degree of repeatability and
time-consistency. By contrast, an automated indicator is based on ﬁxed numer-
ical algorithms and can be replicated consistently. It should be stressed that an
automated index should not be considered as being totally objective, since the
choice of the predeﬁned procedure is often made by analysts and the processing
of the input may require subjective judgement such as the labelling of a train-
ing set. In this respect, all available indicators contain subjective elements in
various degrees. However, automatic computational features generally allow a
relatively high degree of repeatability.
Regarding the subjective measures, indicators based on the Introductory
Statement of the ECB’s press conferences were created by Berger et al. (2011);
Musard-Gies (2006); Rosa & Verga (2007); Rosa et al. (2008). A relatively
popular indicator within the subjective class is the KOF Monetary Policy Com-
municator (MPC), which is regularly produced by the KOF Swiss Economic
Institute of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich and fol-
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
5
===PAGE 6===
lows the ECB press conference schedule (KOF Swiss Economic Institute, 2007).1
The index is constructed by coding the ECB’s statements on upside and down-
side risks to price stability as respectively hawkish (+1) and dovish (-1). The
codings are provided by media analysts of Media Tenor, a media research in-
stitute. The KOF MPC is obtained by aggregating the single codings of the
statements on risks to price stability, relative to all statements about price sta-
bility in the introductory statement, including neutral (or factual) statements.
By construction, the KOF MPC is restricted to take values in the interval [-1;
+1]: the larger a positive (negative) value of the KOF MPC, the stronger the
ECB communicated that there are upside (downside) risks to price stability. As
opposed to the HD-index, the KOF MPC measures the tone of the statements
and not the media’s perception of the statements.
Contributions to (semi)-automated measures are relatively scarce in the eco-
nomic literature. Diﬃculties are mainly the repeatability of criteria used to
classify texts (which by their nature relies on individual judgement) and the
computational complexity often associated with employing expert algorithms.
Most studies using objective measures focus on the text of the press statement
itself. For example, Heinemann & Ullrich (2005) proposed a Wording Indicator
that associates words and expressions, used in central bank communication, to
monetary policy cycles; and Apel & Grimaldi (2012) proposed to measure the
tone of monetary policy statements by counting a set of key words used in the
Swedish Central Bank’s minutes. A diﬀerent approach was followed by Lucca
& Trebbi (2009), who analysed Federal Reserve monetary policy statements by
measuring the tone of the statement’s media coverage and not the statement it-
self. They used semantic orientation to measure the degree of the news reports’
hawkishness/dovishness in a three day window around the press conference. In
this paper, we start from Lucca and Trebbi’s approach to measure the media’s
perception of the ECB’s monetary policy statements, which is why we analyse
news articles and not the statement itself. To measure the perception captured
by the HD-index, we limit the scope to three days around the press conference
(one day before the press conference, the day of the conference and the day
after) and use an adjusted version of semantic orientation rescaled in the in-
terval [-1; +1]. Within the economic literature on (semi)-automated measures,
researchers focus on the use of predeﬁned key words and dictionaries to quan-
tify the information contained in text. In this paper we propose advanced text
mining techniques as alternative to the predeﬁned word lists. We compare the
use of text classiﬁcation models to the semantic orientation method in order to
investigate if more advanced computational techniques could lead to improved
measurements of the media’s tone.
1Based on the information provided by the KOF Institute, it is not clear if the index should
be considered as purely subjective. However, given its low degree of reproducibility, the index
is classiﬁed as subjective.
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
6
===PAGE 7===
3 The HD-index
To compute the HD-index we apply two diﬀerent methodologies: semantic ori-
entation and text classiﬁcation.
The semantic orientation approach was inspired by the methodology orig-
inally proposed by Lucca & Trebbi (2009), who analysed how Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) monetary policy statements were reﬂected in press
reports. Semantic orientation is a concept from computational linguistics and
deﬁnes the position of a word or string of words between two opposite concepts.
In the research literature this concept is most often used to measure the degree
of positiveness or negativeness of a given word or set of words. Turney (2002)
has used semantic orientation to classify reviews as positive or negative. For a
given phrase, he deﬁned its semantic orientation score as the diﬀerence between
the strength of its association with a set of positive words and a set of negative
words, using Pointwise Mutual Information as a measure for association. In
this way, the indicator expresses the perception of the ECB’s press statements
on a numeric scale reﬂecting the relative frequency of two opposite concepts (in
this case, dovish or hawkish) in a news article by counting the co-occurrences
of strings referring to the ECB with words and expressions that are normally
associated with these concepts. Using this method, we calculate the semantic
orientation score for each article in our corpus of slightly less than 9,000 articles,
published between January 1999 and January 2016. The HD-index created us-
ing the semantic orientation scores will be referred to as HD
SO and is explained
in more detail next.
The alternative methodology presented in this paper, applies text mining
techniques to the data set of articles in order to build a model that classiﬁes each
article as either hawkish or dovish, while simultaneously assessing the magnitude
of the hawkishness or dovishness. Text mining is the process of deriving high
quality information from text documents using techniques from data mining,
statistics, information retrieval, machine learning and computational linguistics.
We apply a Support Vector Machines classiﬁcation model on the same data set,
trained on a sample with a vocabulary of 6,245 words. The resulting HD-index
will be referred to as HD
SVM.
To compute our HD-index, we used articles extracted from the Dow Jones
Factiva database. We have crawled for articles that mention the ECB in a
two-day window after the press conference. We have searched for articles in
English, that mention the words ‘ECB’ or ‘European Central Bank’. To select to
news sources, we choose the categories ‘Major News and Business Publications:
Europe’ and ‘Major News and Business Publications: US’. Figure 1 shows the
news sources represented by our crawled data set and their respective proportion
of articles in the corpus.
ECB Working Paper 2085, July 2017
7